The era of the great famine and the great
leap forward is roughly 50 years behind us,
but we're now in a period of rapidly proliferating
publications and new research on the subject.
This video doesn't require any prior knowledge
of the history of China, and will very rapidly
introduce you to the basic facts of what this
buzzword means (when we talk about "China's
Great Famine"), and how we know about it,
with an overview of the emerging literature.
The quickest way to introduce the subject
is to look at a specific example, in a specific
part of China, and to then expand to the larger
scale of the nation as a whole.
Xinyang is the name of both a prefecture and
a small city in Henan province: it is not
especially large, and it is not especially
important, but it is especially well-researched,
and was one of the first examples of the famine
to have good archival evidence available in
both Chinese and English.
In Xinyang alone more than one million people
died in the great famine, about one eighth
of the prefecture's population; in this case,
the Chinese government's own sources affirm
the estimates offered by outside researchers,
with very little variation between the estimates.
Here's an example from a specific commune
within the same prefecture, quoting archival
documents produced by the government: "The
original population of the commune was 36,691
and from Sept. 1959 to June 1960, 12,134 of
them died […]."
"[For example,] Jiāng Wān village [姜湾]
had a population of 45 persons, of whom 44
died, leaving only a sixty year old woman
who went mad."
"[The commune had] a total of 1,510 [Communist
Party] cadres…"
"628 [of them], or 45.1%, took part in beatings.
The number [of people] beaten totaled 3,528
(among them 231 cadres), with 558 dying while
being beaten, 636 dying subsequently, 141
left permanently disabled, 14 driven to commit
suicide, and 43 driven away."
So, in the case of this specific commune,
a staff of only 1,510 people were responsible
for more than 12,000 deaths, in less than
one year's time.
If the geography is a little bit confusing,
I'll just note that Guangshan is a long bicycle-ride
down the road from Xinyang city, and they're
both in the same prefecture, within Henan
province.
When people say that this was a "man-made
famine" (and not a natural disaster), what
do they mean?
Well, thousands of pages of new publications
have discussed and documented the issue, but
to give a really quick answer, I'll continue
with the same example of Xinyang prefecture.
"Yu Dehong says that during the famine, Xinyang
had more than 500 million kilos of grain stored
in silos; added to that year's harvest of
1.45 billion kilos, some 2 billion kilos were
available.
If the reserve grain had been distributed,
no one would have starved.
[…]"
"The starving people saw storage silos full
of grain, but no one attempted to steal it.
People sat alongside storage depots waiting
for the government to release grain and crying
out, "Communist Party, Chairman Mao, save
us!"
Some people starved to death sitting next
to the grain depots."
What was the pattern of coercion and violence
that created this catastrope of mass starvation
throughout China?
We'll now look at an even smaller scale, a
specific production unit within the same county,
within the same prefecture.
"Although the communal dining hall was closed
due to lack of food, the production team leader
still stipulated "three major rules": no fires
should be lit in the homes of commune members,
no wild herbs should be gathered, and no one
should leave the commune to escape starvation.
[…]"
"Of the brigade's 25 [Communist] party members,
21 took part in beatings…"
"Out of an original population of 1,496 people,
555 died—490 by starvation, 55 by beatings,
and 10 by suicide.
Another 438 were severely beaten."
In this case, just 25 people were responsible
for 555 deaths, in the space of less than
one year.
So, as you can now imagine, the rediscovery
of this chapter of history has relied in large
part on the Chinese government's own records
of what happened, exhumed from archives, and
not just eye-witness accounts to the events.
In some cases, of course, all of the eye-witnesses
are dead.
Just working with this one example, you can
also imagine how the body-counts add up to
totals in the tens of millions.
We've just seen how 555 deaths in one work-unit
contributed to more than 12,000 deaths in
the county; and this county contributed to
the total of more than one million deaths
in the prefecture.
When researchers add up the totals from all
of the prefectures, and work with demographic
data to fill in the blanks, they come to estimates
with a minimum of 30 million deaths, with
Frank Dikötter supporting a higher total
of 45 million.
Although we've just taken a glance at this
chapter of history at a small scale, the carnage
unfolded on a tremendously large scale.
And yet, if you look around, there is remarkably
little photographic evidence available, and
many articles and books make use of unrelated
images from unrelated famines, to try to provide
some illustration for these events.
The photos you've just seen are from 1946:
although they show starving people in China,
they're from the wrong place at the wrong
time (they should be treated as spurious).
In 2013, Frank Dikötter reflected that, "…despite
months of patient work sifting through mountains
of yellowing folders, I never came across
a single photograph of the catastrophe in
those archives.
Historians in Beijing explained away the lack
of photographic evidence by telling me that
party cadres at the time did not have any
cameras, as China was still a poor country.
It's not a convincing explanation: The archives
are replete with criminal investigations that
contain exhaustive photographic evidence from
the 1950s and 1960s -- mug shots of criminals,
photos of crime scenes, even rolls of film
documenting land disputes between collective
farms."
"Certainly the state propaganda machine never
lacked for photographic equipment.
[…]"
"So what happened to the visual evidence of
one of the world's most horrifying atrocities?"
"The Red Guards, Mao's armed revolutionaries
during the Cultural Revolution, probably destroyed
it."
The cover of Frank Dikötter's book features
one of these spurious photographs: the starving
boy with the empty bowl was photographed in
1946 by George Silk.
This photograph is actually indicative of
poverty and starvation prior to the Communist
takeover of government in 1949, and this is
the sort of inconsistency that denialists
will pounce on --and there are, indeed, millions
of people who are in denial about the great
famine, who would minimize its significance
or deny that it happened at all.
Whether you look at Chinese sources or Western
ones, the only images you'll find from this
period are propaganda.
The people may look poor and tough, but you
never see starvation; and this was indeed
a period when millions of people were being
forcibly starved to death, and facing extreme
violence if they even dared to complain about
it.
How many millions?
Yang Jisheng uses a total of 36 million, primarily
arrived at through archival sources, such
as the ones I've already quoted from his book.
Frank Dikötter came to a significantly higher
total of 45 million, using a different methodology.
You might think this would be a polite disagreement
between scholars, but no, actually, the contentions
surrounding these estimates have become somewhat
impolite (with disagreements between the two
in print).
Of course, those who want to deny or minimize
the famine use much lower numbers, but due
to demographic evidence there are no longer
respectable sources using estimates below
30 million.
Of course, another significant issue is the
number of years that are included in defining
the period.
Those who want to focus narrowly on the worst
years of the famine will tend to speak of
the three years from 1959 to 1961 (this has
been colloquially known as "the three bitter
years" [三年困难时期]).
A slightly longer time-frame is used for ideological
reasons, defining the disaster in terms of
the government policies that surrounded it,
from 1958 to 1962 (note that this does not
coincide with "the Great Leap Forward", as
that was considered to have ended in 1960).
Admittedly, if you're writing a book on the
subject, you need to stop somewhere, but there
is an argument for continuing to study the
famine period right up to 1965.
If you look at this chart of grain production,
you can see that it's not until 1965 that
production per capita recovers to pre-crisis
levels.
However, most of the books cited in this video
use a shorter time-frame.
The current wave of publications on the Great
Famine and the failures of the Great Leap
Forward seems to have begun with a book written
in English, by a journalist living in Hong
Kong.
Although I doubt that many people read his
book inside China, it is clear that the mere
existence of the book raised many questions,
and set new research projects in motion.
In the western world, Becker's book had a
tremendous emotional and intellectual impact,
but it was generally dismissed by those who
wanted to make excuses for Communism, partly
just because the author was a foreigner, and
also because it relied on eye-witness accounts,
and used indirect and American-archived sources
(rather than the type of smoking-gun evidence
we've just been quoting from more recent research).
I'm not at all suggesting that those who dismissed
Becker's work were correct to do so; on the
contrary, more recent studies have backed
up many of his observations, but he lacked
the mountain of evidence to back up his claims
that later books would indeed provide.
The next big step forward in the literature
was the research of Qiao Peihua, focussed
on the same example that I used to open this
video: Xinyang prefecture.
This was published in Chinese in 2009, and
I cannot find any evidence that it was ever
translated into English (although some sources
promised that it would be).
It's significant to note, however, that Qiao's
work was already circulating in the year 2000,
as shorter articles and as unpublished manuscripts;
you'll find that it is cited and named as
an inspiration by other books that were published
more recently than 2009.
If the earlier work of Jasper Becker was lacking
the sort of massive, documentary evidence
that would force denialists to take it seriously,
we may say that Yang Jisheng's enormous two-volume
work was at the opposite extreme: it demanded
to be taken seriously.
Although there are probably few people who
have read the whole thing, this book has had
a tremendous cultural impact in establishing
some of the basic facts about this period
of history in a form that most find irrefutable.
It includes interviews and emotionally moving
vignettes along with hundreds and hundreds
of pages of dry facts, directly from the Chinese
government's own archives.
Whereas Jasper Becker was a western journalist,
Yang Jisheng writes as an insider, as someone
who both understands the whole structure of
the Communist Party, and as someone who was
a sincere Communist in his youth.
Although I'm sure that most people encounter
this book just in the form of a summary or
an article that is just a few paragraphs long,
they're aware that a mountain of evidence
stands behind it, and that has marked a new
epoch in the evaluation of 20th Century China's
history.
Frank Dikötter's book, already mentioned,
came out during the years when Yang's work
was available in Chinese only (with no English
translation).
As Dikötter wrote in English, his work is
relatively easy to read, and relatively easy
to lift, at a mere 420 pages.
Incidentally, when Yang's book was finally
translated into English in 2012, it was reduced
to less than half of its original length.
Each of these books has built on the research
that came before, and the 2012 study by Zhou
Xun expands our knowledge partly by taking
a different geographical focus: she worked
primarily on archives in Sichuan and Guizhou.
Although you might think we're now at the
end of a period of new archival sources inspiring
controversy, we may be just at the beginning.
In 2013, a digitized collection of 7,000 primary
source documents became available to researchers,
a dramatic contrast to the difficult conditions
described by Yang and others, who struggled
to work with restricted materials in government
archives.
Digitization may open the way to a slew of
new studies, although struggles with government
censorship will doubtless continue.
Meanwhile, archived government documents are
in some ways the least interesting of historical
sources.
The two books shown here gained public and
political interest primarily because of the
authors' ethnographic fieldwork (or, in plain
English, because they contained original interviews
with survivors of the era).
As with Zhou Xun's work mentioned before,
these are also significant as studies of particular
areas within China, showing that each province
and each cluster of communes had significantly
different experiences of the same period of
history.
So, this video has served its purpose in introducing
the subject, and introducing the new literature.
In closing, we might ask, why is this happening
now?
I think the answer is as simple as the old
Chinese propaganda slogan of studying the
past for what it can add to the present: although
there's an impulse to memorialize and mourn
the dead, nobody can doubt that this chapter
of China's history is now being used to challenge
the authority of the Communist Party, to make
a hopeless plea for accountability in a country
where the government is never accountable,
and to call for an end to an era of totalitarianism
that never really ended --an end to Communism
in China.